content/en/posts/2022-10-16-sending-email-via-commandline.md, before:

---
title: "Sending Email via Commandline"
faicon: "fa-brands fa-ubuntu"
date: 2022-10-16T08:53:22Z
publishDate: 2022-10-16T08:53:22Z
images: []
draft: false
tags: ["ubuntu","tips","email"]
ShowToc: true
cover:
    image: "/images/blog/justin-morgan-D2TZ-ashGzc-unsplash_cropped.jpg"
    alt: "Gmail"
    relative: false
---

# Introduction

My personal/home network is probably more complicated than most (I'll document it soon), but basically I have 3 local servers and 2 VPS running multiple VM's, Docker and LXD containers (all are backed up).
One thing I find very useful is email reports from each of those servers and sometimes from within the containers themselves.
Rather than setting up, and maintaining, my own email server which is no easy task, I use [MSMTP](https://marlam.de/msmtp/) for sending emails from the terminal or scripts via a dedicated Gmail account.

# Prerequisites

  * Ubuntu server (should also work on Debian too)
  * Gmail account

# Installation

Installation on Ubuntu is incredibly simple. Run the following command...

> sudo apt install msmtp msmtp-mta mailutils bsd-mailx -y

MSMTP and all the additional supporting software will now be installed ready to configure.

# Setting up the Gmail account

In order to use your Gmail account via the terminal or scripts it will need to be set up securely.

If you want to use your the Gmail account to send emails, you can't just use your usual Gmail password. This would be a HUGE security risk. Instead, Gmail requires you to generate so-called app passwords, one for each application that needs to access your Gmail account.

This approach has several advantages:

  * Gmail won't block you because it thinks that you're trying to sign in from an unknown device, a weird location or whatever.
  * Your main Gmail password remains secret, you won't have to write it down in any configuration file or anywhere else insecurely.
  * You can change your main Gmail password and sending emails from your server will still work.
  * You can revoke an app password anytime, without impacting your main Gmail password or account access.

As you can see app passwords are a really good idea, it just requires a bit of work to set it up.

## Enable 2-Step Verification

*2-Step Verification* **MUST** be enabled on your Gmail account. 

Simply visit https://myaccount.google.com/security.

![2-Step Verification](/images/blog/2-step-start.jpg)

If it's not enabled, enable it. You'll need to login and authorize it which can be a bit tedious, but you only have to do it once in a lifetime, and after it's done, you're left with a more secure account, so it's not all bad?

## Generate App password

Next visit https://myaccount.google.com/apppasswords, and login.

![App Passwords](/images/blog/app-passwords.jpg)

Under "Select app", click "**Mail**", and under "Select device" click "**Other *(Custom name)***"

![App Passwords Custom Name](/images/blog/app-passwords-custom.jpg)

It's supposed to be used from only one place, ie. from ONE application that is installed on ONE device. Some choose simple naming scheme like **Server Notifications**, I choose **notifications@vpsserver1**, it's free form, choose whatever name suits you, as long as it makes sense to you, and click **Generate**

An App password is a 16 characters string, so let's write it down for now, and we're done with the Gmail config, and despite how it's displayed there are NO SPACES in the App password.

![Generated App Password](/images/blog/app-password-generated.jpg)

# Configuration

There are a number of steps required to fully setup email sending across the server.

## Setup MSMTP
First we need to configure *msmtp* to route all the server’s mail through the Gmail SMTP server.

Run the following command...

```bash
sudo nano /etc/msmtprc
```

Now set it's contents to...

```bash
#Accounts will inherit settings from this section
defaults
auth            on
tls             on
tls_certcheck   off
timeout         10
# tls_trust_file  /etc/ssl/certs/ca-certificates.crt
# Gmail address
account   gmail
host      smtp.gmail.com
port      587
from      email.address@gmail.com
user      email.address@gmail.com
password  app-password

# Set a default account
account default : gmail

# Map local users to mail addresses
aliases /etc/aliases
```

Press **Ctrl+x** to save the changes.

## Set up mailx

In order to be able to use the *mail* command we need to configure *mailx*

Set mail transport agent to use msmtp

```bash
echo "set mta=/usr/bin/msmtp" | sudo tee -a /etc/mail.rc
```

## Set up aliases

We need to link system users with email addresses in order for system users to receive mails from cronjobs, etc.

```bash
sudo nano /etc/aliases
```

```bash
# Example aliases file
     
# Send root to Joe and Jane
root: joe_smith@example.com, jane_chang@example.com

# A specific username on the server
username: email@address.com

# Send everything else to admin
default: admin@domain.example
```

Press **Ctrl+x** to save the changes.

```bash
echo "alias root root<owner@example.com>" | sudo tee -a /etc/mail.rc
```

Emails are now sent to this address if e.g. a cronjob fails. Also a general fallback address is used if messages don’t belong to root. Of course more users can be set.

## Setup sendmail support

A lot of scripts and services use */usr/sbin/sendmail* for sending emails. Thankfully the [first msmtp feature](https://marlam.de/msmtp/) that is listed on the homepage is *"Sendmail compatible interface (command line options and exit codes)"*. Meaning that *msmtp* is a drop-in replacement for sendmail.

By installing the *msmstp-mta* package above all the configuration is handled for us and everything should work *"out of the box"*.

# Test it!

Sending a simple email to a user on a different domain.

```bash
echo "Hello World" | msmtp -d username@domain.com
```
Or, send both a subject and a body:

```bash
printf "Subject: Test\n\nhello there username." | msmtp -d username@domain.com
```

Test sending a mail to *root*

```bash
echo "Testing msmtp from ${HOSTNAME} with mail command" | mail -s "Hi root" root
```

Test sending a mail to another email address

```bash
echo "Testing msmtp from ${HOSTNAME} with mail command" | mail -s "Hi there" user@different-domain.com
```

# Conclusion

With this setup it is now very simple to integrate email functionality into the OS and any service/scripts which run on the server, without having to maintain a dedicated email server.

## Credits

Many thanks to [Arch Wiki](https://wiki.archlinux.org) which helped me stitch together all the information I needed.

  * https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/msmtp

Although not Ubuntu related the Arch Wiki is an *invaluable* resource for anyone running Linux of any kind.

Commit message:

Updated Cleite theme and supplementary YAML.

content/en/posts/2022-10-16-sending-email-via-commandline.md, after:

---
title: "Sending Email via Commandline"
faicon: "fa-brands fa-ubuntu"
date: 2022-10-16T08:53:22Z
publishDate: 2022-10-16T08:53:22Z
images: []
draft: false
tags: ["ubuntu","debian","tips","email"]
summary: Simplify sending email from your Debian servers without setting up an SMTP server.
ShowToc: true
cover:
    image: "/images/blog/justin-morgan-D2TZ-ashGzc-unsplash_cropped.jpg"
    alt: "Gmail"
    relative: false
---

# Introduction

My personal/home network is probably more complicated than most (I'll document it soon), but basically I have 3 local Proxmox servers and 2 VPS running multiple VM's, Docker and INCUS containers (all are backed up).
One thing I find very useful is email reports from each of those servers and sometimes from within the containers themselves.
Rather than setting up, and maintaining, my own email server which is no easy task, I use [MSMTP](https://marlam.de/msmtp/) for sending emails from the terminal or scripts via a dedicated Gmail account.

# Prerequisites

  * Debian server (should also work on Ubuntu too)
  * Gmail account

# Installation

Installation on Debian is incredibly simple. Run the following command...

> sudo apt install msmtp msmtp-mta mailutils bsd-mailx -y

MSMTP and all the additional supporting software will now be installed ready to configure.

# Setting up the Gmail account

In order to use your Gmail account via the terminal or scripts it will need to be set up securely.

If you want to use your the Gmail account to send emails, you can't just use your usual Gmail password. This would be a HUGE security risk. Instead, Gmail requires you to generate so-called app passwords, one for each application that needs to access your Gmail account.

This approach has several advantages:

  * Gmail won't block you because it thinks that you're trying to sign in from an unknown device, a weird location or whatever.
  * Your main Gmail password remains secret, you won't have to write it down in any configuration file or anywhere else insecurely.
  * You can change your main Gmail password and sending emails from your server will still work.
  * You can revoke an app password anytime, without impacting your main Gmail password or account access.

As you can see app passwords are a really good idea, it just requires a bit of work to set it up.

## Enable 2-Step Verification

*2-Step Verification* **MUST** be enabled on your Gmail account.

Simply visit https://myaccount.google.com/security.

![2-Step Verification](/images/blog/2-step-start.jpg)

If it's not enabled, enable it. You'll need to login and authorize it which can be a bit tedious, but you only have to do it once in a lifetime, and after it's done, you're left with a more secure account, so it's not all bad?

## Generate App password

Next visit https://myaccount.google.com/apppasswords, and login.

![App Passwords](/images/blog/app-passwords.jpg)

Under "Select app", click "**Mail**", and under "Select device" click "**Other *(Custom name)***"

![App Passwords Custom Name](/images/blog/app-passwords-custom.jpg)

It's supposed to be used from only one place, ie. from ONE application that is installed on ONE device. Some choose simple naming scheme like **Server Notifications**, I choose **notifications@vpsserver1**, it's free form, choose whatever name suits you, as long as it makes sense to you, and click **Generate**

An App password is a 16 characters string, so let's write it down for now, and we're done with the Gmail config, and despite how it's displayed there are NO SPACES in the App password.

![Generated App Password](/images/blog/app-password-generated.jpg)

# Configuration

There are a number of steps required to fully setup email sending across the server.

## Setup MSMTP
First we need to configure *msmtp* to route all the server’s mail through the Gmail SMTP server.

Run the following command...

```bash
sudo nano /etc/msmtprc
```

Now set it's contents to...

```bash
#Accounts will inherit settings from this section
defaults
auth            on
tls             on
tls_certcheck   off
timeout         10
# tls_trust_file  /etc/ssl/certs/ca-certificates.crt
# Gmail address
account   gmail
host      smtp.gmail.com
port      587
from      email.address@gmail.com
user      email.address@gmail.com
password  app-password

# Set a default account
account default : gmail

# Map local users to mail addresses
aliases /etc/aliases
```

Press **Ctrl+x** to save the changes.

## Set up mailx

In order to be able to use the *mail* command we need to configure *mailx*

Set mail transport agent to use msmtp

```bash
echo "set mta=/usr/bin/msmtp" | sudo tee -a /etc/mail.rc
```

## Set up aliases

We need to link system users with email addresses in order for system users to receive mails from cronjobs, etc.

```bash
sudo nano /etc/aliases
```

```bash
# Example aliases file

# Send root to Joe and Jane
root: joe_smith@example.com, jane_chang@example.com

# A specific username on the server
username: email@address.com

# Send everything else to admin
default: admin@domain.example
```

Press **Ctrl+x** to save the changes.

```bash
echo "alias root root<owner@example.com>" | sudo tee -a /etc/mail.rc
```

Emails are now sent to this address if e.g. a cronjob fails. Also a general fallback address is used if messages don’t belong to root. Of course more users can be set.

## Setup sendmail support

A lot of scripts and services use */usr/sbin/sendmail* for sending emails. Thankfully the [first msmtp feature](https://marlam.de/msmtp/) that is listed on the homepage is *"Sendmail compatible interface (command line options and exit codes)"*. Meaning that *msmtp* is a drop-in replacement for sendmail.

By installing the *msmstp-mta* package above all the configuration is handled for us and everything should work *"out of the box"*.

# Test it!

Sending a simple email to a user on a different domain.

```bash
echo "Hello World" | msmtp -d username@domain.com
```
Or, send both a subject and a body:

```bash
printf "Subject: Test\n\nhello there username." | msmtp -d username@domain.com
```

Test sending a mail to *root*

```bash
echo "Testing msmtp from ${HOSTNAME} with mail command" | mail -s "Hi root" root
```

Test sending a mail to another email address

```bash
echo "Testing msmtp from ${HOSTNAME} with mail command" | mail -s "Hi there" user@different-domain.com
```

# Conclusion

With this setup it is now very simple to integrate email functionality into the OS and any service/scripts which run on the server, without having to maintain a dedicated email server.

## Credits

Many thanks to [Arch Wiki](https://wiki.archlinux.org) which helped me stitch together all the information I needed.

  * https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/msmtp

Although not Debian related the Arch Wiki is an *invaluable* resource for anyone running Linux of any kind.

{{< notification title="Updates" >}}
  * 2025-08-04 - Updated network details.
{{< /notification >}}
